# Key Terms (Biblica)

## License Information

**Key Terms (Biblica)** is based on and adapted from: _Biblica Bible Dictionary_, [Biblica, Inc.](https://www.biblica.com/), 2023, which is licensed under a [CC BY-SA 4.0 license](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/legalcode.en).

This markdown version is provided under the same license.



--------------------------------

## 1,000 years (id: 132135)

In a vision, John saw that the devil was locked in the Abyss for 1,000 years. John also saw that Christ ruled for 1,000 years. Some of his followers who had been put to death ruled with him. Some people believe that these things will happen exactly as John saw them in the vision. Others believe that these things are signs. They are signs of how God will bring judgement against evil and bring his kingdom to earth.


## 12 judges (id: 132376)

12 leaders were called judges in the book of Judges. Their work included more than the work of judges who made decisions about laws. They were military leaders who fought against Israel’s enemies. God used them to rescue his people from being treated badly. These leaders served in different areas of Israel and among different tribes after Joshua died. They didn’t lead all 12 tribes at once. These 12 leaders were Othniel, Ehud, Shamgar, Deborah, Gideon, Tola, Jair, Jephthah, Ibzan, Elon, Abdon and Samson. Other leaders like Samuel also served as judges in this way.


## 12 tribes (id: 132232)

Jacob had 12 sons. The families of Jacob’s sons and grandsons became very large tribes. These 12 family groups made up the nation of Israel. In different parts of the Bible, the list of tribes includes different names. But they are all sons or grandsons of Jacob. God promised to give them the land of Canaan to live in. (Jacob)

* **Associated Articles:** Jacob (ID: `132214@BiblicaStudyNotesKeyTerms`)

## 144,000 (id: 132130)

This number was 12 x 12,000\. It was a way to talk about the entire people of God. They were from all times and places and there were too many to count. It didn’t mean exactly 144,000 people from Abraham’s family line. It meant the complete number of those who trust in Jesus.


## 24 elders (id: 132127)

Beings that John saw in a vision of heaven. It’s thought that they are a sign. The number 24 may mean the 12 tribes of Israel together with the 12 apostles. In this way they are a sign for all of God’s people. Their white clothes show that they have been made right with God. Their crowns and thrones show that they are part of the kingdom of God. These also show that the elders have authority to rule. The elders worship God for creating the world and for saving his people. They worship him for being holy, great and worthy.


## 40 days (id: 132286)

A way that writers of the Bible described when something spiritually important happened. This could be a spiritual challenge. It could be a time of being close to God or meeting with God. It could be a time of turning away from sin and having stronger faith in God. It may or may not have lasted for a period of 40 days and 40 nights. The numbers were a sign about the spiritual thing that happened. This sign was important in the lives of many prophets and in the life of Jesus.


## 40 years (id: 132338)

A way that writers of the Bible described something that happened for a long time. 40 years was thought to equal how long it took to grow old. It described how long the Israelites wandered in the desert before entering Canaan. It described how long many important leaders and kings ruled in Israel. The number was a sign that what happened was important.


## 42 months (id: 132133)

This is three and a half years. It’s half of seven years. In the Bible, seven is the number for things being complete. In Revelation, John saw certain things happen for half of seven years. This meant that those things weren’t complete. It meant that the powerful ruler or government in Revelation chapter 13 wouldn’t have total power. Their power wouldn’t last for ever like God’s kingdom would.


## 605 BC (id: 132497)

The year that many important things recorded in the books of Jeremiah and Daniel happened. It was the year that Baruch wrote down Jeremiah’s prophecies. It was the year that there was an important battle between Egypt, Assyria and Babylonia. The battle was fought at a city on the Euphrates River called Carchemish. Babylonia’s armies won. The Babylonian government then had control over the nations in that area of the world. It was the year that Nebuchadnezzar became king of Babylon. It was also the year that Jehoiakim was taken as a prisoner to Babylon. He and a group of people from the southern kingdom were forced to leave Judah. They were forced to live in exile in Babylon. Daniel, Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego were in this group.


## 666 (id: 132134)

The number of the beast from the sea in John’s vision. There is nothing magic or evil about the number 666\. The number 666 is a sign. It’s a sign for a human being or government that seeks complete and total authority. They claim to be as powerful as God. They also claim to be worthy of being worshipped in the same way as God.


## 70 years (id: 132498)

A way to describe how long the southern kingdom faced the covenant curse of exile. It was a sign that the exile lasted a long time. It was also a sign that the exile wouldn’t last for ever. 70 years can describe several important periods of time. In the year 605 BC Nebuchadnezzar became king of Babylon. About 70 years later, the Persian government took control of the Babylonian government. In the year 605 BC people from Jerusalem were forced to live in Babylon. About 70 years later, a group of Jews returned to Judah from Babylon. In the year 586 BC Babylonian armies destroyed the temple in Jerusalem. About 70 years later, the Jews rebuilt the temple in Jerusalem.


