# Key Terms (Biblica)

**Biblica Study Notes (Key Terms)** © 2023 Biblica Inc. Released under CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. *Biblica Study Notes* has been adapted in the following languages: Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文)from Biblica Study Notes © 2023 Biblica Inc. Released under CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license by Mission Mutual.



--------------------------------

## I am (id: 132250)

The name that God used to describe himself to Moses in Exodus 3:14\. The name is made up of the Hebrew letters YHWH. No one knows exactly what this name means. The letters YHWH sound like the Hebrew words for I am who I am. God is who he is and he chooses what he does. No one and nothing make God be or do anything. Jesus used these same words to describe who he is in the book of John.


## I am statements (id: 132039)

A way that Jesus used to tell people who he is. In John’s gospel Jesus used the words I am in a special way seven times. With these words he described himself and the work he was doing on earth. God used the words I am when he told Moses his name in Exodus 3:14\.


## Iconium (id: 132061)

A city in the Roman territory of Galatia in Asia Minor. Paul visited it on three of his journeys to share the good news about Jesus. It’s thought that Paul’s letter to the Galatians was read to the church there.


* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Iconium (ID: `place:Iconium`)
## Immanuel (id: 132484)

A name in the Hebrew language that means God is with us. In the time of King Ahaz, Isaiah prophesied about a boy named Immanuel. He would be a sign that God was with the southern kingdom. This child was a sign that the southern kingdom would be saved. They would be saved from enemy armies that attacked them. Isaiah’s prophecy also had a meaning for the future. Matthew wrote about this in his gospel. Through Jesus, God was with his people in a human body. Jesus is the Immanuel who saves God’s people from the enemies of sin and death.


* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Jesus (ID: `person:Jesus.2`)
## In Jesus’ name (id: 132019)

People can do something in the name of someone else. When they do this, it means they are doing it with that person’s authority. They are doing it as if that other person were the one doing it. The disciples prayed, spoke and acted in Jesus’ name. This showed that they believed Jesus has complete authority in heaven and on earth. It also showed that they were doing the work Jesus had taught them to do. People were baptised in Jesus’ name. This means that they went through baptism because they believed in Jesus. Their baptism showed that they were completely committed to following Jesus.


## Incense (id: 132317)

Something that is burnt to make smoke that smells good. Many people groups throughout history have used incense in their worship practices. God gave instructions to priests in Israel about how to burn it. They used shallow cups to burn it on an altar. It was an offering to honour God. The incense smelled sweet and this reminded God’s people that God gave them good things. Smoke from incense was also a sign of prayers being prayed to God.


* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Incense (ID: `realia:Incense`)
## Isaac (id: 132207)

The son God promised Abraham that he would have with his wife Sarah. Isaac married Rebekah and was the father of Jacob and Esau. In the Hebrew language, Isaac means he laughs. God continued his covenant with Abraham through Isaac.


* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Isaac (ID: `person:Isaac`)
## Isaiah (id: 132443)

A prophet in the southern kingdom of Judah during the time of Hezekiah and other kings. In the Hebrew language his name means the Lord will save or the Lord is salvation. Stories about him are in 2 Kings and 2 Chronicles. His prophecies are recorded in the book of Isaiah.


* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Isaiah (ID: `person:Isaiah`)
## Ishmael (id: 132208)

The son Abraham had with Sarah’s slave Hagar. Ishmael wasn’t the son God had promised to give Abraham. But God took care of Ishmael and he also became the father of 12 tribes.


* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Ishmael (ID: `person:Ishmael.2`); Ishmael (ID: `person:Ishmael.3`); Ishmael (ID: `person:Ishmael.4`); Ishmael (ID: `person:Ishmael.5`); Ishmael (ID: `person:Ishmael.6`); Ishmael (ID: `person:Ishmael`)
## Israel (id: 132226)

The name that God gave Jacob. In the Hebrew language Israel means someone who struggles or wrestles with God. All people from Jacob’s family line were called the people of Israel. They are known as Israelites. God made the Mount Sinai covenant with them (Mount Sinai covenant). He chose them to show all other people groups who he is. Israel also was the name of the land where Jacob’s family line lived after the exodus. After King Solomon died, the northern kingdom was called Israel.

* **Associated Articles:** Mount Sinai covenant (ID: `132274@BiblicaStudyNotesKeyTerms`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Israel (ID: `person:Israel`); Israel (ID: `place:Israel`)
