# Key Terms (Biblica)

**Biblica Study Notes (Key Terms)** © 2023 Biblica Inc. Released under CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. *Biblica Study Notes* has been adapted in the following languages: Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文)from Biblica Study Notes © 2023 Biblica Inc. Released under CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license by Mission Mutual.



--------------------------------

## Laban (id: 132220)

The son of Bethuel and brother of Rebekah from Mesopotamia. He was the father of Rachel and Leah. He tricked Jacob and took advantage of him for many years.


* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Laban (ID: `person:Laban`); Laban (ID: `place:Laban`)
## Lamb of God (id: 132032)

A title for Jesus that describes how he sacrificed himself. During the first Passover, lambs were sacrificed. Because of their blood the Israelites were saved from being destroyed. After that, lambs were used in Jewish worship practices as a sacrifice for sin. Jesus sacrificed himself by giving up his life on the cross. His sacrifice saves people from being destroyed by sin, death and evil. In this way he is like the lambs sacrificed by the Israelites. In Revelation, Jesus looked to the prophet John like a Lamb that had been killed. Yet the Lamb was alive. This is because Jesus was raised from the dead after he died on the cross.


## Laodicea (id: 132108)

A city in the Roman territory of Asia Minor in what is now called Turkey. It was near Colossae. Epaphras shared the message about Jesus there and helped start a church. Paul wrote the Laodicean church a letter. The church in Laodicea is one of the seven churches mentioned in Revelation.


* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Laodicea (ID: `place:Laodicea`)
## Last days (id: 132482)

A way to talk about a time in the future. Some prophets in the Bible described it as a time when God would take action. He would take action to make sure that all people honoured him. Other writers in the Bible described it as a time of suffering. It would be a time before God judged the world. People would do many evil things during that time. Some New Testament writers described the time after Jesus’ resurrection as the last days. It was considered the time the church lives in until Jesus returns to earth.


## Law of Moses (id: 132281)

There are two meanings for the Law of Moses. The first meaning is God’s instructions for the Israelites about how to live their lives. This is also called the law. It includes the Ten Commandments. God gave these instructions through Moses. Some of the laws were about worshipping God in proper ways. Other laws were about how the Israelites were to treat one another. Others dealt with how the Israelites were to live together in communities and as a nation. The second meaning of the Law of Moses is the first five books of the Old Testament. That is where all the laws are recorded. These books are also called the Torah and the Pentateuch. In the Hebrew language Torah means law. In the Greek language Pentateuch means five scrolls. (Ten Commandments, Jewish laws)

* **Associated Articles:** Jewish laws (ID: `132016@BiblicaStudyNotesKeyTerms`); Ten Commandments (ID: `132277@BiblicaStudyNotesKeyTerms`)

## Laws in Leviticus (id: 132308)

God gave Moses and Aaron laws for how the Israelites were to live together. Many of them were general rules about things that might have happened in those days. They were to help the people learn about who God is. The laws helped them to make wise decisions about everyday matters. God’s people were to make all their decisions based on who God is.


## Leader who serves (id: 132005)

Jesus is the example for how everyone should treat others. This includes people with authority, power and honour. It includes leaders of any group of human beings. Jesus is the King of all that God created. He came to earth to serve people so they would understand God’s love for them. He didn’t use his power and authority to force people to do what he wanted. He didn’t make people treat him like he was more important than anyone else. Instead he was humble. He showed deep concern for all people. He gave up his life to show people God’s love. All believers are to follow Jesus’ example of loving and serving others. The Holy Spirit gives Jesus’ followers different gifts and abilities to use to serve others. When believers serve others, they are also serving Jesus.


## Leah (id: 132221)

The eldest daughter of Laban and first wife of Jacob. Rachel was her sister and Zilpah was her servant. She became the mother of Reuben, Simeon, Levi, Judah, Issachar, Zebulun and Dinah.


* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Leah (ID: `person:Leah`)
## Letters to the churches (id: 132119)

Jesus commanded John to write letters with messages to seven churches. Each letter began by describing Jesus in a different way. In most of the letters, Jesus mentioned ways that the church was living faithfully. In most he also mentioned ways the church wasn’t being faithful to him. Jesus urged the believers in each church to listen to the Holy Spirit. Jesus finished each letter with a promise. The promise was for those who shared in his victory over the power of sin.


## Levi (id: 132329)

A son of Jacob and Leah. In the Hebrew language Levi means attached. His family line became a tribe of Israel. All priests in Israel came from Levi’s family line.


* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Levi (ID: `person:Levi.2`); Levi (ID: `person:Levi.3`); Matthew (ID: `person:Matthew`); Levi (ID: `person:Levi`)
## Levites (id: 132289)

People from the family line of Jacob’s son Levi. All males in Levi’s tribe had special work to do. They took care of the holy tent and later the temple. Levites from Aaron’s family line served as priests (Aaron, Priest). The Levites didn’t receive land when the nation of Israel started living in Canaan. God provided for them from what the other tribes had.

* **Associated Articles:** Priest (ID: `132279@BiblicaStudyNotesKeyTerms`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Tribe of Levi (ID: `group:Levi`)
## Light (id: 132492)

Throughout the Bible there are two meanings for the word light. The first meaning is when the sun is shining and there is light outside. The second meaning is a sign of things that agree with God. Light includes things that show or do what God wants for his world. It includes peace, understanding, health and goodness. God’s light works to free God’s world from evil and evil spiritual beings (evil spiritual beings). These are described as darkness (darkness). The time when God rules as King is talked about as the kingdom of light.

* **Associated Articles:** Darkness (ID: `131985@BiblicaStudyNotesKeyTerms`); Evil spiritual beings (ID: `132164@BiblicaStudyNotesKeyTerms`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Luz (ID: `place:Luz.2`)
## Light for the Gentiles (id: 132491)

Words that described the work of God’s servant (Isaiah 42:6 and Isaiah 49:6\). The servant would make sure that God’s covenant and salvation reached all people groups. In the New Testament, Simeon understood that Jesus would do this work (Luke 2:30–32\). Paul and Barnabas understood that they were to be light for the Gentiles too (Acts 13:47\). They did this by sharing the message about Jesus with Gentiles. In Acts 26:23 Paul preached about how Jesus brought the message of God’s light. This is the message of salvation from the power of sin and death. Jesus brought this light to Jews and Gentiles. Jesus’ followers are to share Jesus’ light and salvation with the whole world.


## Living water (id: 132505)

A way of talking about how God provides everything that people need to live. In the Bible it’s also called water that gives life and the water of life. Water is living when it’s fresh and moving. People drink it to stay alive and plants and animals can live in it. Prophets described God as a spring of water that gave life to his people. They described him as a shepherd who led his people to springs of water. And they described how water would flow out of Jerusalem. This water would give life to the whole world. In the New Testament, Jesus described the Holy Spirit as living water. Jesus gives living water to people who believe in him. This means that he shares the Holy Spirit with them. The Spirit provides what their spirits need. This is like how water provides what their bodies need. The Spirit helps them serve others. This is how the living water flows out from inside of people. In Revelation, God offers the water of life freely to everyone who believes in him.


## Lord (id: 132172)

The name that the Israelites used to talk about God. In the Hebrew language the name is made up of the letters YHWH. No one knows exactly what this name means. These letters sound like the Hebrew words for I am who I am.


* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Jesus (ID: `person:Jesus.2`); LORD (ID: `deity:Lord`)
## Lord - Ruler (id: 132275)

A title for a ruler, leader or master. It’s used as a title for God in the Bible. It means that God has authority over everything and everyone. In New Testament times, lord was used as a title for the Roman emperor. It meant that Caesar had authority everywhere that the Roman government was in control. Jesus’ followers called him Lord. This meant that they recognised that Jesus is God. They recognised that Jesus has complete authority over everything and everyone. Jesus’ followers challenged the authority of Caesar when they called Jesus Lord.


## Lord Jesus Christ (id: 132092)

A title for Jesus that describes him in many ways. As Lord, he has authority over all other rulers on earth. As Jesus, he is a Jew who lived in Israel when the Roman government was in control. Jesus is also God’s Son. As Christ, he is the Jewish Messiah and King. The title Lord Jesus Christ means that Jesus is the King of everything. It means he is the Saviour who rescues God’s people and the natural world. He rescues them from sin, death, and evil. It means he is worthy of worship because he is God.


* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Jesus (ID: `person:Jesus.2`)
## Lord’s day (id: 132118)

What John the writer of Revelation called Sunday or the day after the Sabbath day. It’s the day of the week when Jesus was raised from the dead. Because of this, churches started gathering to worship God on Sundays.


## Lord’s Supper (id: 132094)

The meal that Christians share together to remember Jesus’ death. It’s based on the last supper that Jesus shared with his disciples before he died. It’s also based on the Jewish Passover Feast. The meal includes eating bread and drinking wine. These remind believers that Jesus gave his body and his blood to save all people.


## Lot (id: 132194)

The grandson of Terah and nephew of Abraham. He went with Abraham and Sarah when they travelled to Canaan to live. He chose to live in the valley of the River Jordan near Sodom. His wife died during the time when God destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah. The Moabite and the Ammonite people groups were from Lot’s family line.


* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Lot (ID: `person:Lot`); Lot (ID: `realia:Lot`)
## Love God (id: 132301)

God created people to receive his love and to love him in return. God’s love changes people and makes them able to love him. Love for God is both a feeling and a choice that people act on. The action they take is to obey him. Love for God is shown by obeying his commandments. The Law of Moses in the Old Testament and Jesus in the New Testament teach this.


* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Loving God (ID: `keyterm:LovingGod`)
## Luke (id: 132024)

The writer of the Gospel of Luke and the book of Acts. He was a doctor who travelled with Paul and worked with him.


* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Luke (ID: `person:Luke`)
## Lystra (id: 132062)

A city in the Roman territory of Galatia in Asia Minor. Paul visited it on three of his journeys to share the good news about Jesus. Paul’s friend Timothy who worked with him was from Lystra. It’s thought that Paul’s letter to the Galatians was read to the church there.


* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Lystra (ID: `place:Lystra`)
