# Key Terms (Biblica)

**Biblica Study Notes (Key Terms)** © 2023 Biblica Inc. Released under CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. *Biblica Study Notes* has been adapted in the following languages: Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文)from Biblica Study Notes © 2023 Biblica Inc. Released under CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license by Mission Mutual.



--------------------------------

## Zebulun (id: 132389)

The sixth son of Jacob and Leah. In the Hebrew language the name Zebulun probably means honour. His family line became a tribe of Israel.


* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Zebulun (ID: `person:Zebulun`)
## Zechariah (id: 132457)

A priest and prophet in Judah when the Persian government was in control. He was the son of Berekiah and was from the tribe of Levi. He encouraged Joshua and Zerubbabel to rebuild the temple. His visions and prophecies are recorded in the book of Zechariah. This was a different Zechariah to the father of John the Baptist.


* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Zechariah (ID: `person:Zechariah.10`); Zechariah (ID: `person:Zechariah.11`); Zechariah (ID: `person:Zechariah.12`); Zechariah (ID: `person:Zechariah.13`); Zechariah (ID: `person:Zechariah.14`); Zechariah (ID: `person:Zechariah.15`); Zechariah (ID: `person:Zechariah.16`); Zechariah (ID: `person:Zechariah.17`); Zechariah (ID: `person:Zechariah.18`); Zechariah (ID: `person:Zechariah.19`); Zechariah (ID: `person:Zechariah.2`); Zechariah (ID: `person:Zechariah.20`); Zechariah (ID: `person:Zechariah.21`); Zechariah (ID: `person:Zechariah.22`); Zechariah (ID: `person:Zechariah.23`); Zechariah (ID: `person:Zechariah.24`); Zechariah (ID: `person:Zechariah.25`); Zechariah (ID: `person:Zechariah.26`); Zechariah (ID: `person:Zechariah.27`); Zechariah (ID: `person:Zechariah.28`); Zechariah (ID: `person:Zechariah.29`); Zechariah (ID: `person:Zechariah.3`); Zecher (ID: `person:Zecher`); Zechariah (ID: `person:Zechariah.4`); Zechariah (ID: `person:Zechariah.5`); Zechariah (ID: `person:Zechariah.6`); Zechariah (ID: `person:Zechariah.7`); Zechariah (ID: `person:Zechariah.8`); Zechariah (ID: `person:Zechariah.9`); Zechariah (ID: `person:Zechariah`)
## Zechariah - NT (id: 132026)

The father of John the Baptist. Elizabeth was his wife. He was a priest from the tribe of Levi and from Aaron’s family line. Zechariah spoke a beautiful prophecy when John the Baptist was born.


* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Zechariah (ID: `person:Zechariah`)
## Zelophehad’s daughters (id: 132351)

Mahlah, Noah, Hoglah, Milkah and Tirzah were from the tribe of Manasseh. Their father Zelophehad died in the desert after the Israelites refused to enter Canaan. His daughters received land for Zelophehad’s family line since he had no sons. They married cousins in their family group. This way their land would always belong to the tribe of Manasseh.


* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Hoglah (ID: `person:Hoglah`); Mahlah (ID: `person:Mahlah`); Milcah (ID: `person:Milcah`); Noah (ID: `person:Noah.2`); Tirzah (ID: `person:Tirzah`)
## Zilpah (id: 132236)

A servant of Leah. Leah gave her as a concubine to Jacob (concubines). The family lines of her sons Gad and Asher became tribes of Israel.

* **Associated Articles:** Concubines (ID: `132211@BiblicaStudyNotesKeyTerms`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Zilpah (ID: `person:Zilpah`)
